


04-16-2023 - Access Modifiers


NOTE: This topic is related to accessibility of the classes and the class members.

CLASS MEMBERS:
1. constructor
2. instance variables
3. methods
4. block

public class
public constructor
public instance variables
public methods

public access modifier: it is the most accessible modifier.


4 Access Modifiers
public 		-> most accessible - anywhere in the project
protected
default 	-> accessible only in the same package
private 	-> least accessible - accessible only in the same class



2 Non-Access Modifiers
final 		-> modification restriction
static		-> access with class of the object




Class Modifiers
1. public classes: You can access and instantiate this class anywhere in the project.
2. default classes: You can access and instantiate this class
only in the same package.


NOTE: A java class can be either public or default
IT CANNOT BE protected or private



Constructor Modifiers
1. public constructor: You can create object using public constructor anywhere in the project.
	NOTE: If your constructor is public but your class is default, then class access modifier will override the rule and you can create objects only within the same package.

2. protected constructor: You can create object using default constructor only within the same package. 
	NOTE: Protected can act like public in case of inheritance.
	Inheritance: parent-child classes

3. default constructor: You can create object using default constructor only within the same package.

4. private constructor: You can create object using private constructor only within the same class.


				protected

			Is there inheritance?

		YES 						NO
	   public  					  default



Instance Variable Modifiers
1. public instance variables: these instance variables are accessible anywhere within the project.

2. protected instance variables:these instance variables are accessible only within the same package.
	NOTE: protected instance variables can be accessed anywhere in case of inheritance.

3. default instance variables: these instance variables are accessible only within the same package.

4. private instance variables: these instance variables are accessible only within the same class.




Method Access Modifiers
1. public methods: accessible anywhere in the project.
2. protected methods: accessible only within the same package but inheritance can make it accessible anywhere in the project.
3. default methods:accessible only within the same package.
4. private methods: accessible only within the same class.



NOTE: class blocks does not take any access modifiers.
static: executes once before everything else.

static {
	
}

instance: executes each time for an object being instantiated.
{
	
}



final: it is used for classes, methods and instance variables.
final instance variable: you have to initialize this instance variable and the value cannot be changed.
final methods: this method cannot be overridden. You cannot change the method body.
final class: this class cannot be a parent.


static: it is related to accessing class members either with the className or the object name.

static instance variables: can be invoked with class name
static methods: can be invoked with class name

non-static instance variables: can be invoked with an instance
non-static methods: can be invoked with an instance

NOTE: Constructors and blocks are not considered for static and final keyword.


CAN CLASS BE STATIC?
-The class cannot be static but programming languages allows us to create classes within the classes. In this case, we can name them as outer class and inner class. Inner class becomes a member of outer class and it can be static.


class A{ // cannot be static
	
	class B{ // can be static

	}
}


sub class -> child class


Tuesday:
KAHOOT: 5 people +
OOP Class Members
Memory management - mutability
Access Modifiers





OOP class-object
	-OOP Class Members
	-Memory management - mutability
	-Access Modifiers




OOP Principles
1. Encapsulation : data privacy, instance variables
2. Inheritance : parent-child -> code reusability
3. Abstraction : hiding implementation but showing functionality
4. Polymorphism : one object in many shapes




Collections
	-Arrays
	-List: ArrayList, LinkedList, Vector
	-Set: HashSet, LinkedHashSet, TreeSet
	-Map: HashMap, LinkedHashMap, TreeMap, Hashtable


REST:
Exceptions
Fundamentals



Recursion, Lambda, Streams, Time APIs, Enums, RegEx, Functional Programming, SpringBoot.......




Hackerrank
Leetcode
Google -> What are the most asked Java Whiteboard interview questions




What is encapsulation?
How do you achieve encapsulation?
Why do you use encapsulation?
Where did you use encapsulation in your previous projects?

















